SesameStreet++
There are 10 sorts of people in the world: those who understand binary and those who don't.
~ From “Proof Wiki” jokes page ~
Most of us think about “whole numbers” not too differently from the way we learned to count by watching Sesame Street, the difference being that now we can count a little higher. How we’ve trained ourselves it’s automatic to think that the way we write a number or say a number IS the number.
If I say “I owe you 13 cents” and I give you one dime and three pennies then after thanking me profusely for repaying this staggering debt, we’ll agree that it’s settled with those coins equaling 13 pennies. We identify the symbol “13” very strongly with this particular number - it would be tough to get through life in the modern world without such an automatic process running in our brains. This example highlights what this particular symbol “13” actually means - one dime () plus three pennies ().
Let’s look at the number 13 in some alternative ways - it’s the number of months in a year plus one month; what I’m suggesting is that there is no need for the symbol “13” in order to think about this particular number of months. Similarly, 13 is this many apples 🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏 ; or 13 is the sixth prime number. None of these ways of thinking about the number 13 require that we represent it using the digits 1 and 3 butted up next to each other.
Each number exists independently from any symbol or word that might represent it. Numbers are an idea - perhaps such a strong idea that the universe wouldn’t exist without them! Anyway, for our purposes whole numbers exist in some abstract realm - Each number is one whole unit more than the previous number, starting at nothing, that is “zero”, and jumping to something, that is “one”, then “one” more, which gets us to “two”, then again to “three”, etc. Continuing in this way forever… we get them all.
To get back to the idea of what a whole number really is, try to forget about the symbols or words we use and picture a pile of apples. There’s zero apples (it’s hard to show no-apples), then we introduce an “🍏” to get our very first, and smallest, non-empty pile of apples. Then add another apple to get a pile of “🍏🍏”, then “🍏🍏🍏”, then “🍏🍏🍏🍏” then some big pile of “🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏⋯🍏🍏🍏” after we’ve been adding apples for a while. Each successively bigger pile of apples corresponds with each successive whole number.
We expand this entire set of whole numbers to include their negative-counterparts and call this larger set “integers”. We denote the set of integers with this symbol: . If we only want to talk about positive integers along with zero, we use this symbol: . When we talk about numbers in mathematics we always treat them as belonging to some kind of set (like the integers) in this pure, abstract sort of way.
However... using a “1” followed by a “3” to represent “🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏” is VERY handy. So we use Hindu-Arabic numbers and the positional notation of “base-ten”, more commonly known as “decimal”, to represent each specific integer. We slap a “-” on the front if we need to talk about a negative integer.
Base-ten representation of an integer is far superior to ancient Roman numerals for example. Try adding two numbers together in ancient Rome, or worse, multiplying or dividing them. What’s XI times IX? Would you believe me if I told you it’s XCIX? Unless you convert those to Hindu-Arabic numerals to check, you’re just gonna have to trust me. Truth is - I don’t know how to multiply using Roman numerals - nor did most Romans! Not only that, but I’ll bet that most kids who graduated from Sesame Street can count higher than any Roman could - as the Roman system only effectively allowed counting up to 4999. 
Using base-ten for us is automatic, we barely think about it when we’re adding numbers or multiplying them - but it’s worth looking carefully at how base-ten works - so let’s examine it from the ground up.
It’s useful to have simple symbols to represent each of the integers from one to nine, namely our familiar 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 which have an interesting history and predate their use in base-ten.
Slightly more modern, but still quite ancient, is the symbol “0” for “zero”, originally meaning “empty”. Zero also predates its use in base-ten but without zero, base-ten wouldn’t be possible.
Base-ten uses the idea of stringing a series of digits together (a digit being one of the numbers 0, 1, 2, … 9), one after the other to be able to represent any whole number. Let’s look at the first two-digit number, that is, ten, which as you well know looks like this: “10”. This extra digit on the left tells us how many tens we have and the last, or rightmost digit says how many additional units to add to it.
So our very first two-digit number 10 means “one lot of ten - plus zero units”. When we see “11” - we interpret it to mean “one lot of ten - plus one unit”, and “12” is “one lot of ten - plus two units”, etc. Continuing on; “20” - we interpret to mean “two lots of ten, plus zero units”, etc. up to “90” meaning “nine lots of ten, plus zero units”.
Following this line of reasoning since “10” now means the integer ten (i.e., 🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏🍏), then “100” must mean “ten lots of ten, plus zero units”- which is exactly what it means. We have a special word for this number we call it “one hundred” or “one lot of a hundred, plus zero lots of tens, plus zero units”. Similarly “200” means “two lots of a hundred, plus zero lots of ten, plus zero units”, etc., etc.
We can keep going by one-hundred until we similarly get to “1000” or “ten lots of a hundred, plus zero lots of ten, plus zero units” otherwise knows as “a thousand” or more specifically “one lot of a thousand, plus zero lots of a hundred, plus zero lots of ten, plus zero units”.
It get’s a little tedious to be so specific when reading out a number so our language has developed quite a few verbal shortcuts. Furthermore it doesn’t take long before we run out of fancy names for these “powers of ten” like, million, billion, trillion, zillion etc.. So let’s introduce some nice clean mathematical notation to describe these powers of ten and let’s forget the fancy words.
        100        = ,
        1000        = ,
        10000        = ,
        ⋯
        10⋯000        = 
The last line,, means there are  k  10’s multiplied together - also written as a 1 followed by  k  zeros. The above list shows the cases for k = 2, 3 and 4. Using the k  like that is just a way to show that we can pick ANY whole number, i.e., there is no limit on how big k can be.
The notation of is very handy, in fact it extends to the case when and . So means that there is only one 10 multiplied together, in other words just the number 10. That  also tells us how many zero’s follow the “1”, so in this case there is one “0” following the “1” - again, our familiar 10.
How about when . Examining the pattern of how the power k relates to how many zeros follow the “1” (eg, 10, 100, 1000, etc.) then, i.e., no zeros follow the “1”, which is exactly correct. Actually any number raised to the 0th power is 1, but we’ll leave that explanation for another time.
Let’s look at an example. Reading the number 46307 out according to our technique we can see that it’s “four lots of ten-thousand, plus six lots of a thousand, plus three lots of a hundred, plus zero lots of ten, plus seven units”:
        4        ×        10000                        40000
+        6        ×        1000                +        6000
+        3        ×        100        =        +        300
+        0        ×        10                +        00
+        7        ×        1                +        7
________________

        =        46307
Written in terms of powers of ten: .
You can think of each digit as being a little dial that controls how many lots of its corresponding power of ten will contribute to the value of the integer. Claim: Given that we can use as high as power of ten as we like and we can string together as LONG A LIST of digits as pleases us, that means that we can create ANY INTEGER WE WANT no matter how big it is.
That’s a pretty tall claim. How do we know that we can create ALL the nonnegative integers with this scheme? For example, how do we know that we didn’t miss one? Or how do we know that some string of digits doesn’t represent two different integers?  I know it seems silly to ask that, but attention to these kinds of details is what is referred to as “rigor” in Mathematics - it’s necessary so we don’t end up fooling ourselves or spouting bullshit - or if we are full of it then it’s easy for other Mathematicians to call us on our nonsense.
We’re going to jump into the deep end and make our claim in a careful mathy kind of way. Such a careful statement is called a theorem - stay tuned - theorems require proof, which we’re going to supply!
Base-Ten Representation Theorem
Let :  Then every  n  can be uniquely expressed as follows:

for some  k  such that  where ,.
Furthermore except when .
Definition:  n is represented in base-ten as 
A difficulty many folks have with math is the notation - it’s kind of a language unto itself - like a computer program is a language. Let’s take our theorem statement by statement and turn it into English.
i)        “Let  ”
This means we are going to talk about two distinct numbers that we are labelling  n  and k . That strange looking  ∈  means “is an element of” (or “is a member of”) and is always followed by something that is a “set”. We talked above about the symbol which we defined as being the set of nonnegative integers. So, in other words, n can be one of 0 or 1 or 2 or 3 or ... any number - no matter how large -  and the same goes for k.

So this is what it would sound like to read that line out loud:
“Let  n  and  k  be elements of the set of nonnegative Integers.”
ii)        “Then every  n  can be uniquely expressed as follows”
⋯what we are about to say applies to ALL nonnegative integers and furthermore the expression is going to be unique for each integer.
iii)        “”
This is the expression in question. It equates n with a series of multiplications of some numbers (the terms where i can be any number from 0 to k) times descending powers of 10, and adds them all together.

If we had to read it out loud it might sound something like this:
“n  is equal to...  dee-k times ten-to-the-k,  plus dee-kay-minus-one times ten-to-the-k-minus-one,  plus etc etc, down to... dee-two times ten-squared,  plus dee-one times ten,  plus dee-zero times one”.

It’s useful to point out the meaning of our etc.  terms. Mathematical formulas such as this make judicious use of “subscripts” when coming up with names for lists of variables or constants. Subscripts following a letter or symbol, such as  are a handy way to get a list of variable or constant names that are similar looking to each other, and is meant to imply that they each fulfil a similar role to each other. Note here how the value of the subscript on each “d” corresponds to its power of ten, even in the single digit case when the subscript is 0, or the highest power case when the subscript is k.
iv)        “for some  k  such that  for each ,”
The “for some k” means that each integer  n  has a specific  k  associated with it. 

It then states that those terms are nonnegative integers, and can ONLY take on the values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9. Note that our uniqueness claim above means that each integer  n  has it’s own unique list of d’s.

It also is very fastidiously pointing out that the little ‘i’ we just introduced in the subscript of the d’s is also an integer and can be as small as zero but only as large as our highest power  k  - whatever  k  might be. This is very picky stuff - like a computer program spelling things out very precisely so the computer knows exactly what you mean. (That’s right - you are the computer).

Sounding it out may sound like this: “for some  k  such that zero is less-than-or-equal-to dee-i which is less-than-or-equal-to nine, for each dee-i and i, which are nonnegative integers; also  i  is between zero and  k  inclusive”
v)        “Furthermore ...”
This is spelling out one more important fastidious detail. We want to make sure that the “most significant d”, that is, our that goes along with the highest poweris not 0, in other words it must be one of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9. This is necessary so that we can get our uniqueness property, otherwise we could say 13 = 013 = 0000013 which are all the integer 13, so let’s outlaw this uninteresting and annoying possibility.
vi)        “...except when ”
completing that last statement which allows for one exception to the case where the “most significant digit” could be zero, and that’s exactly when the integer n in question IS zero.
vii)        “Definition:  n is represented in base-ten as ”
This is introducing what it means to write the number out in base-ten; that is, we toss out all the extraneous stuff from our expression in (iii) above, and string all the “digits” one after another, from most significant digit on the left down to least significant digit on the right.
Before we prove our theorem, consider that base-ten is not the only base in use these days. Since the introduction of the EDVAC computer, around 1950, there have been many orders of magnitude more calculations done in base-two (otherwise known as binary) by computers than have EVER been done by people in base-ten for the entirety of human history. (This might even be true if we only count one-day’s worth of binary computer calculations - someone needs to check this.)
These binary-computer logic gates (the building blocks of the modern computer) can only take one of two states, that is; “off” or “on”. We interpret these two states to represent these two numbers: 0 and 1. By doing so, in the same way that base-ten uses ten numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 for its digits;  we can represent integers in base-two with just the digits 0 and 1. How is this possible? … first let’s take an imaginary trip into space.
Consider distant Planet-Nova on which the emergent intelligent species only have nine fingers. They have three hands with three fingers each - anyway, that’s why they use base-nine, so they only need the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 for their digits. So like we Earthlings do for the integer ten, instead of making up a new symbol for nine, they use “10” to represent the integer nine - which for them means “One lot of nine, plus zero units”.
Similarly on Planet-Ocho, since they only have eight fingers, then they use base-eight and only use numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 for their digits. For them “10” means “One lot of eight, plus zero units”.
On and on past Planet-Gary-Seven, and Planet-Secks, Planet-Penta, …
Finally we come upon Planet-Claire (well someone has to come from Planet-Claire, I know she came from there), where the poor blighters only have two fingers so they only use the digits 0 and 1 and base-two, so for them “10” means “one lot of two and zero units”. So on Planet-Claire “10” means two. Recall above how we arrived at our 100 in base-ten, being “ten lots of ten, plus zero units” - similarly on Planet-Claire “100” in base-two for them means “Two lots of two plus zero units” in other words, four! What is “11” in base-two? Using our technique to describe the digits we see that it’s “One lot of two, plus one unit”, in other words three.


________________


Here’s how they count on Planet-Claire using base-two:

                base-two        base-ten        base-two        base-ten
                0        0        (...cont)
                1        1        1001        9
        +        1                1010        10
        =        10        2        1011        11
        +        1                1100        12
        =        11        3        1101        13
        +        1                1110        14
        =        100        4        1111        15
        +        1                10000        16
        =        101        5        10001        17
        +        1                ...
        =        110        6        11111        31
        +        1                100000        32
        =        111        7        ...
        +        1                1000000        64
        =        1000        8        10000000        128
                (cont…)                100000000        256 (...etc.)
Note something interesting in the list above - the powers of two, written in base-two, resemble our powers of 10 in base-ten!  That is: , , , , ,, ,,, etc.
Let’s look at the binary number 11010 for example. Using our wordy technique to describe the number we can see that it’s “One lot of sixteen, plus one lot of eight, plus zero lots of four, plus one lot of two, plus zero units”: 
        1        ×        10000                        10000         (16)
+        1        ×        1000                +        1000        (8)
+        0        ×        100        =        +        000
+        1        ×        10                +        10        (2)
+        0        ×        1                +        0
________________

        =        11010        (26)
Written in terms of powers of two:,
Each digit in base-two can be thought of as a little switch that turns on or off the contribution of its corresponding power of two. Claim: Given that the inhabitants of Planet-Claire can use as high a power of two as they like, and that they can string together as LONG A LIST of binary-digits as pleases them, that means that they can create ANY INTEGER THEY WANT no matter how big it is.
Sound familiar? Let’s restate our theorem for base-ten but rewritten for base-two.
Base-Two Representation Theorem
Let :  Then every n can be uniquely expressed as follows:

for some  k  such that  where ,.
Furthermore except when .
Definition: n is represented in base-two as 
Try reading the above out loud in your head, line by line, item by item, like we did above when we “sounded it out” for the base-ten theorem - it’s helpful to turn the “code” into understandable English and a useful habit to get into when reading mathematical statements.
Before we go on, I want to introduce a little notation to help avoid confusion. How do you know what I’m talking about if I just write “1000”?  Do I mean or ? If there is any possibility for confusion we write the number like this for the base-ten version of 1000 and to mean the binary version.
As is hinted by the habits of our various alien friends above it seems that we can use ANY integer greater than or equal to 2 as a base (base-one doesn’t really make sense - think about it for a while). In fact computer graphics artists are known to stumble upon numbers written in hexadecimal, which is base 16 (usually relating to specifying a color-channel). Base 16 introduces some new single-character symbols to the usual numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, to represent each number 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, namely: A, B, C, D, E and F where A16=(10)10, B16=(11)10, C16=(12)10, D16=(13)10, E16=(14)10, F16=(15)10. So if you see this number (80FB)16 then I bet at this point (if you take a little time with a calculator and a pad of paper and pencil) then you can figure out that it’s (33019)10. Note that if we omit the parentheses and subscript from a number, it means we’re talking about it in base-ten - our “default” base. Case in point… the subscripts that we use to denote the base (like the “16” in (80FB)16) are written in base-ten!
We really need to get on with proving our two theorems above. But what about proving the “base-nine” version of the theorem for the aliens on Planet-Nova, or the “base-eight” version for the inhabitants of Planet-Ocho?
To cover all bases (pun intended) let’s restate our theorem for the general case, call it “base-b”, where b is any number greater than or equal to two. If we can prove that theorem, then we’ll automatically get all the cases of specific bases for free.


________________


Basis Representation Theorem
Let such that :  Then every integer n can be uniquely expressed as follows:

for some  k  such that  where ,.
Furthermore except when .
Definition:
        n is represented in base-b as 
        and each is a base-b-digit of n.
The motivation for our proof is to spell out the technique for actually constructing the base-b representation of any integer and show that this can ALWAYS be done, and each step is unique.
This technique makes repeated use of a well established theorem which is called the “Euclidean Division Theorem” -  It sounds onerous, but don’t worry, you all learned it in the third grade but perhaps not so formally. It simply states the following:
Euclidean Division Theorem
For all where b ≠ 0, there exists unique integers q, r such that:
  and  
Definition: In the above equation:
a is the dividend        (“the number being divided”)
b is the divisor                (“the number doing the dividing”)
q is the quotient         (“the result of the division”)
r is the remainder         (“the leftover”)
This is how you first learned to divide.  For example if someone asks you “What is nineteen divided by three?” - you’d answer “six with one remaining”. Here 19 is the dividend,  3 is the divisor, 6 is the quotient and 1 is the remainder. Written in the form of our theorem:

An important thing to note here is that the quotient and the remainder are always unique. We won’t prove the Euclidean Division Theorem - we’ll take it as already proven and use it.


________________


Proof of “Basis Representation Theorem”
Let such that .
We are going to construct a “base-b” representation of .
Let  n  be a dividend. Since b ≠ 0 we can use b as a divisor. So, by the Euclidean Division Theorem, there exists a unique nonnegative integer quotient and remainder  such that:
        where 
Now consideras a new dividend, keeping b as the same divisor: by the Euclidean Division Theorem, there exists a unique nonnegative integer quotient and remainder  such that:
        where 
Similarly, by applying the Euclidean Division Theorem to the new quotient and continuing ad infinitum we can say that there exist unique nonnegative integer quotients   and remainders   such that:
        where 
        where 
        where 

Let  and let’s also call a quotient for simplicity’s sake (even though it’s really ‘n’) so the general form for any quotient in our list can be defined to be:
Definition:
        ,        where  for all 
Hopefully you can see where this is going - all the values that the remainders can take are precisely within the same bounds as required by the “Basis Representation Theorem” for its “digits”. (Eg. if then .) Somehow, these remainders are going to end up being our base-b digits.
The problem we face at this juncture is that our list of quotients looks to be never-ending. Luckily there always comes a point in the list where a quotient becomes zero and then they are all zero from that point on.  In other words, this process of generating quotients needn’t go on forever, we can stop listing them once one becomes zero since none of the subsequent zero-valued quotients will contribute anything more to the value of n, so we can ignore them!
All of that is fine and dandy but this is a proof. We need rigor and none of this hand-waving stuff, so let’s proceed by restating our claim more carefully - then prove it:
*Claim: There exists an integer j such that , for all.
Suppose  for some :
Then all subsequent quotients,  must also be zero because:
                (by definition of above)
if and only if 
                (since )
showing that both (and ) must be zero since by definition neither of them can take on negative values (which would allow for something like ).
This same argument can be repeated to show that , must also be zero. Let’s restate this conclusion and give it a name.
P1)        If    then   ad infinitum.
If , then by P1 we’ve proven our *Claim - the entire list of quotients is zero. 
Now suppose  for some :
Then because
Either         and the previous inequality is trivially true,
  or         and we have the following:
                (by definition)

        (since )
        (since 2>1 and )
Let’s summarize this conclusion.
P2)        If    then   
Continuing with the supposition that some  then hopefully it’s clear that (hint: P1). Therefore as long as no subsequent  is zero then by P2 we can write

Which implies that one of the quotients must eventually be zero, for even if each quotient was only one unit smaller than the previous quotient then we are guaranteed that the nth quotient must be zero.  In other words:

P3)        There exists an such that 
[Aside: The series of quotients will reach the value zero much! faster than the previous string of inequalities implies - indeed it will only take at most steps which is staggeringly faster than  steps. Eg.  which is a considerably smaller number than 789,456,123 ]
So both P1 and P3 together proves our *Claim, meaning our list of quotients can be treated as finite in length by terminating the process when we reach the first zero quotient.
Let  k  be the index of the last nonzero quotient in our list of quotients.  Then  and our complete list of nonzero quotients appear as follows:













Since each quotient refers to the next one, let’s “back substitute” them, starting at the last quotient and substitute it into the second-to-last expression for and continuing in this manner all the way back to .
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        



        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
Since , then we have proven our theorem since each step is unique and this process can always be done for all integers n.
However, I think it’s asking a bit much of the reader to make that leap between and  above. If you follow the pattern of how the subscripts on the d’s and powers of b work from line to line then you can convince yourself that the logic is sound, but it’s a little tedious and difficult and the truth of the statements doesn’t jump out at you.
There’s another way to unravel our quotients, which avoids making you have to perform mental contortions with subscripts and powers but it involves us introducing a few more mathematical ideas.
Often proofs make use of little mini-theorems of their own. Creating these mini-theorems is way to simplify a step in the main proof by establishing a useful non-trivial intermediary result. It makes reading the main proof easier to follow by not having us get side tracked by technicalities. These mini-theorems are called “Lemmas” and we’re going to make one to help unravel our list of quotients above.  We’ll state the lemma (and prove it below) then we’ll use it the way we made use of the already-proven Euclidean Division Theorem to help with our proof above.


________________


Lemma
Let such that 
Also let where such that
        , and
        , and
⋯ 
        , and
        
then:
        
Note that our lemma is similar to, but more general than what we have going on in our list of quotients. For example, in our lemma it’s only required that the  terms be integers (positive or negative) and only restricts b to be non-zero.
The proof of the lemma is below, so let’s take it as proven and proceed with our main proof. 
Let for each of our quotients, and let the ‘b’ of the lemma be our theorem’s base-b and our remainders be the terms in the lemma. Note that since  (as defined above) then by applying the results of the lemma we can immediately conclude our desired result:

Furthermore, since our process of generating the list of quotients lead to a string of unique quotients and remainders then we’ve also proved the uniqueness of the expression above.
QED
________________


QED - is often used at the conclusion of a proof to state that it’s done - it’s really an acronym for the latin phrase "quod erat demonstrandum" which means"that which was to be demonstrated".  So… we’ve proven the Basis Representation Theorem!


________________


If I still have your attention let’s go ahead and prove our lemma.
As we discussed way up at the top of this essay, the purest way to think about how the set of positive integers is generated is to start with 1, then each successive integer is just one more than the previous one, keeping this process going forever gets us the set.
This idea of stepping one after the other, beginning at 1 and going forever is called the “Principle of Mathematical Induction” and is a basic property of the positive integers.
Suppose that  means that the property holds for the number ; where  is a positive integer. Then the principle of mathematical induction states that  is true for ALL positive integers n provided that:
(i)         is true
(ii)        Whenever  is true, is true.
Why do these two conditions show that is true for all positive integers? Note that condition (ii) only asserts the truth of under the assumption that is true.  However if we also know that condition (i) holds, then because  is true then condition (ii) implies that  is true, which again implies that  is true, which in turn leads to the truth of , etc., over and over for all positive integers.
Some people picture an infinite row of dominoes. Having condition (1) is like being able to knock over the first domino. Then knowing condition (2) is also true is like the fact that any one domino has the ability to knock over the next. Once you’ve knocked over the first domino, they all fall.
Let’s restate the lemma.
Lemma
Let such that 
Also let where such that
        , and
        , and
⋯ 
        , and
        
then:
        


________________


Proof of lemma
This proof will make use of induction on k which represents the largest 
Prove for         

which is trivially true by the definition of  and a valid expression even when , which means we’d have a in there. Mathematicians define to be 1 to simplify annoying cases exactly like this one!  (Google it - it’s legit!)
Now we assume the lemma is true for 
Then if we have a list of expressions:
,
⋯ 

for some 
then the following is true:
        
and we will show that the lemma is true for 
In other words, if we extend our list of expressions by one more item, that our new expanded expression for  will similarly extend out one more term.
Let , then can always be written out as:

For some choice of and , for example it’s always possible if we let and , because

but there are other possibilities for the choices of and when . 
The important point is that it is always possible express the numberwith an expression using newly defined terms such that it takes the form of all the other expressions in our list. Therefore,
        
        
        
which extends our resulting expression by one extra term proving the lemma.
QED






----old ending follows---
Ok we’re ready to finally jump in. In order to prove our theorem - first we will prove that there is such a representation for all integers n (existence). Meaning that every integer has a way of being written in the form described by the theorem - especially as relates to the restrictions on the values that the “digits” can take on. After that has been established we will use another technique to prove that each such representation is unique - in other words there aren’t two (or more) ways to represent the same integer in our base.
Existence Proof (by induction on n):
Base case:
For clarity, let’s prove both  and . (This is like showing that we can knock over both the 1st and the 2nd dominoes.)
Let . We can choose and . (This is the one exception spelled out in the theorem in which the most significant digit of n is allowed to be zero.) Then,
,
showing that we have a valid representation for 0 in base b since our only digit .         (The “” symbol is shorthand for “for all”.)
Now Let . In this case, we can choose  and . Then,
,
showing that we have a valid representation for 1 in base b since .
n+1st step:
Assume that n has a valid representation in base b. That is, we assume that n can be written thusly: 

with all the appropriate conditions holding for the values of and b and k; and we will prove thatalso has a valid representation in base b.
We’re going to break this step into two cases which between the two covers all possibilities.
Case 1) 
This case looks at the situation where the least significant digit of n is strictly-less-than the LARGEST value it can take in base b.
For example, in base-two, can only be 0. In base-five, can be at most 3. In base-ten, can be at most 8, etc.
So we can express as follows: 
        =
        = 
        = 
        = 
and since (our assumption for “case 1”), then 
,
therefore the “least significant digit” (i.e. which corresponds the lowest power) of  is less than or equal to, which means it is a valid digit in base b.
Since all other terms (i.e. ) for are unchanged from their representations for n and n is assumed to be a valid representation in base b then all the digits of are valid in base b.
Therefore we’ve established the truth of “Case 1” for the integer .
Case 2) 
Now we’ll look at the case when the least significant digit of n is equal to the largest value it can take in base b, that is, . (Note that between “Case 2” here and “Case 1” above, we’re covering all the possibilities for what can be. )
For example in base-two, ; in base 5, ; in base-ten , etc.
Let’s temporarily introduce a new digit, to our representation of n. The motivation being that in the situation where we’re adding 1 to 999, that we need another “digit” to “carry” the 1 over into so that we can get 1000.
n        =
        =
        =
        =
Also, let be the lowest power of b such that , meaning we write n as follows for some j.
n        =
For example, if , then , since is the lowest power of 10 such that its digit  is less than 9.
       n        =
        = 
        = 
        = 
        = 
        = 
        = 
        = 
Therefore
        =
        = 
Since we picked j such that  , less restate the inequality as therefore,
,
meaning the digit  for the base b representation of is valid in base b.
All digits and higher remain unchanged from what they were for the base b representation of n, and all digits and lower are 0. Therefore all the digits of the base b representation of  are valid in base b.
To cleanly button this up we note that if we were dealing with the case that , (eg. n was something like 99999) then we can see that because:
        =
        =
        =
        =
Meaning that has a (k+1)st digit and it’s equal to 1, with all the rest of the digits following being 0.
In all other cases (i.e.; ) we discard the extra “temporary” digit  that we created from our expression, and are left with an expression for  that valid for base b.
QED - existence proof
Uniqueness Proof for n:
Let’s assume that our base b representation for n is not unique, Showing that this assumption leads to a logical contradiction, then the only possibility remains is that our assumption was wrong, thereby proving uniqueness.
Suppose n is not unique and that,
        , 
also suppose,
        
Let’s further suppose that the index j is the first power such that the digits and without any loss of generality, let’s assume that .
Therefore